What is the maximum number of threads that can be spawned in a novel?

Stephen Baxter is very fond of spawning three threads (three threads in three books, or three threads in three books in three segments forming a 'sequence'). Iain Banks tends to use two. Charlie used six (nine?) in Accelerando, and two-to-four in Glasshouse. At some point do you stop painting a story arc and start actually describing a scene? Maybe small conflicts (like sentient lobsters?) in individual threads, with the overall aggregate painting a very large picture? Ordinarily, if somebody asked me this question, I'd reply, "well, we call that space opera." But since I am asking the question, I think that answer is actually incorrect. Space opera, if it can be defined in terms of opera, is inherently operatic. This is to say we have a finite number of characters, they are related by way of plot, there is a beginning, a middle, and an end. There is conflict, there are heart-wrenching scenes (hell, even in <i>Fosse</i> there are scenes which are not exactly uplifting), happy scenes, and definitive endings. I mean, think of <i>O Fortuna</i>. Space Opera, then (note big O this time around) is like <i>The Algebraist</i>. The maguffin is lost, needs to be found, hero grabs sword and shield, runs off into the wilderness to find it and slay beasts along the way. Somewhere in the wilderness, Grendel shows up and gets real nasty, but hero deftly avoids Grendel (rather than slaying him). Hero finds maguffin (sort of), everyone is happy, the evil are punished, the good are rewarded, the tortured are healed (even if it means they die &mdash; this is a very common theme), and so on.

What if instead we spawn thirty-two threads? Is it hard to read? I find sometimes that when I read a book with lots and lots of characters, that I have a hard time keeping them distinct. Even reading Clive Cussler (okay, yes, I have read a few Dirk Pitt books), I have trouble keeping who the Nazis are from who the Mobsters are and who the NUMA people are. This is because it's not immediately apparent from the scenery or the situation. The worst, worst case of this is a chapter or section that starts with dialogue.

	"So, character_a, how did you get here?"
	"Well, character_b, I conducted appropriate counter-intelligence procedures, evaded my pursuers, and made use of this fine AC Cobra here."
	"Right-o, good job old chap! Shall we assault that man with the silly hat and bullwhip? He's been hiding up on that cliff all day."
	
Who in the hell are these people? Some of these books even include <i>Dramatis Personae</i> in the beginning so I can flip back and figure out who the hell Horace McBland is in the middle of the book. They're saying, right at the beginning, that I won't be able to keep their characters straight, or that their book is too damn long.

So if you have thirty-two threads, there had better be some overlap in <i>concept</i>, even if there's not much overlap in, say, time. Baxter, for example, is kind of an ass (don't get me wrong, he's a great author, most of the time, but it's really an enormous pain to keep track of a book that spans 30,000 years or more) when it comes to this. He's comfortable switching between threads a few thousand years apart, or eons apart. However, you never really forget who the characters are, because it's immediately apparent who they are from what they're doing, or where you left them last.

In theory, then, one of two things will happen. The book will be written very well and every thread will be appropriately marked as "THREAD_A_SUSPEND_FLAG_A2" when it switches to another thread, and every time a thread resumes it will be appropriately marked as "THREAD_A_RESUME_FLAG_A2" (with prose, not an actual label, you ninny). That's possible, but I'm a programmer, and I think 'goto' is sane. The other option, and frankly I think this is better, is that there are so many threads, some of which won't be revisited (this was used at least once in Baxter's work), that the user (ack! I mean *reader*) stops really caring who they're looking at right now and just starts to admire the scenery. That's not space opera, that's space, uh, painting? diorama? 

Revisiting the character plight (my plight, not that of the characters'), we can look at Banks and Richard K. Morgan, both of which are happy to give you a few pages (or even quite a few pages) of a character whose sole purpose is to look around, show you the scenery, and then die a horrible death. Their death serves a purpose (the man and the dog he's having sex with in RKM's <i>Broken  Angels</a>). It paints the main character, it paints the scene (a war, for example), or whatever. So sometimes, books are not about their characters, but rather <i>the sum of their characters</i> which of course would be incomplete without <i>the sum of their environs</i> since characters are defined both in terms of themselves, and whatever they're struggling with.

Maybe there's a meaning of life in there, but I doubt it.

At any rate, it seems to me that it might not be insane to start writing a book that was designed from the beginning to be an aggregate of dozens of smaller threads. If we work in the confines of 100,000 words (500 pages, a mass-market paperback), we figure 4,000 words per segment? Twenty pages? That actually sounds about right. A typical "short story" sized thread, some of which will have recurring characters, others will simply have their heads blown off, wander off into the sunset, push a big red button, or whatever. If we stretch that out to 120,000 words, which is probably too long, it offers even better freedom. We can have 30 independent sections, maybe 10-12 characters and lots of scenery. The good news about this whole silly idea is that if people tell me I'm an absolute loon, I can rip out pieces 4,000 words at a time and try to publish them as short stories. And maybe, if they're good enough that people recognize them from the first line or two, a) I won't have to or b) they'll be successful as short stories if I do.

Formulae and sanity are overrated. I'm sure of it.